so I finished the last video by saying
that there's some important implications
of the activity lifecycle as it relates
to our activity now one of them is that
if we want to save some data so that
it's available next time the app is
launched then we can't rely on code in
an same instance state to do that
that's because unsaved instance state
isn't always called in fact it's only
used when Android knows that it may be
relaunching the activity the recommended
place to put code to save your own app
data is in the on stop method now the
second thing is that Android will
automatically save the state of widgets
that it expects to contain data and will
restore that data again when the
activities we started now the third one
is less obvious but it's the reason I've
showing you all of this if we want to
say program state that Android doesn't
know about then we need to do that in
unsaved instance state and restore it in
on restore instance State so the sort of
thing I'm talking about here is the
contents of the textview now Android
doesn't save the state of textview
widgets for us because users can't type
into them so that I usually change but
in our case ours does change so
ultimately that responsibility to save
the state comes back to us before the
activity is destroyed now that's a bit
arbitrary in this example because it's
possibly not clear whether the contents
of the textview a state or whether
they're our applications data so when a
calculator app for example the results
are really state I don't think many
users would expect the previous
calculation to appear the next time that
they launch the calculator app but if
this was a data entry screen for a
contact set though then users may expect
the details to still be present even
though they hadn't tapped a Save button
to store them so how you defined data
that the users input into your app well
that really depends on what the app does
and what's being entered
so if our button click counter app was
used to store a shopping list for
example then those details should be
considered as data in other words they
should still be there the next time the
apps launched this section is about the
activity lifecycle though so we're going
to treat any input as state rather than
data we will be looking at saving your
applications data though later in the
course
now one thing we've learned from
students in previous versions of this
course is that it's not clear what we
mean by state and app data so when I
talk about state I'm referring to things
like the values of our variables and the
contents of the edit text and the text
view widgets while the program is
running now when Android destroys our
activity we want it to return to the
same state when it's recreated what that
means is that the inner text should
contain whatever it contained before it
was destroyed and the textview should
also have the same text as it had before
the app was destroyed now each time the
user taps the button their text is taken
from the edit text widget and appended
to the textview and it's a bit grim that
if they rotate the device they lose
everything that that typed in previously
so the state refers to the things that
need to be restored to make things like
a device rotation appears seamless to
the user so I'm willing to bet that
before you started programming for
Android you weren't aware that apps got
destroyed when you rotated the device
now your users are also unlikely to be
aware of this so we need to make sure
that everything looks the same after a
rotation as it did before that rotation
so that's state your programs data isn't
the same thing you know if the user
starts to type some input into the other
text that uses the back button to close
the app they probably wouldn't be too
surprised if that input wasn't still
there when they launch the app again two
days later but on the other hand if
they'd created a list of items in the
textview then tapped our Save button
they'd probably be very unimpressed if
they couldn't load that list back up
again two days later now I know I
haven't added a Save button but
hopefully that explains the difference
between state and the apps data the data
is stuff that users would expect to
still be available when they launch the
app again days or even months later if
you typed a message into Facebook or
Twitter then minimize your browser you'd
expect the message to still be there
when you restored your browser window
that's state if you close the browser
without posting the message you probably
wouldn't be surprised that the message
was no longer there when you log back in
but on the other hand if you click the
post button
you would expect to see the message
so--that's app data so it's exactly the
same message the same text but context
is everything
so as I've said we're not going to be
dealing with storing data just yet that
will come later in the course so for
this app anything the user types in
won't be saved when they quit the app we
should make sure it's still there when
they do things like rotating the device
though so let's go ahead and do that all
right so a bundle contains a list of key
value pairs and we can add new data to
the bundle by saving the data with a
name that we use to get the data back
now one way to think of a bundle is like
the mail being delivered to a house each
envelope will have a person's name on it
each name is a key inside the envelope
will be the value that's associated with
the key now when the people in the house
want to get their mail they'll use the
key their name to pick up the correct
envelope the key was also used when the
data was put into the envelopes the name
was written on the outside so when we
store a value in a bundle we're
associating the value with a key when we
want to get the value back out of the
bundle we provide the key to ensure we
get the correct value all right so we
need to make some changes to our code
now and because we're going to be using
the key name at least twice we're going
to create a constant to store that name
so don't come down here
below the line 12 I'm going to change
line 12 firstly to a Const so I'm going
to make that private Const Bell and tag
we're going to leave that line as it is
then and the next line then we're going
to add private Const though we're going
to call this one all in uppercase text
underscore contents equals we're going
to call it text content so now that
we've done that we can save the text
views content in the unsaved instance
State so I do a search for that unsaved
instance dates are down here we're going
to add some code in there to save that
so we need to put this code after these
saved are sorry the super dot on save
instance state call on line 63 so we're
going to type
outstate question mark dot put string
then we're going to use our new
constants I'd text underscore contents
comma and we're going to type text view
question mark dot text dot to string now
our text view is a nullable type so we
need to put a question mark after its
name just as we did earlier the same is
true of the outstate parameter so it's
declared as bundle question mark and you
can see that on line 61 so consequently
we have to use the question mark when we
attempt to access its properties and
functions so we're adding the value we
want to store to the bundle using a key
that we can use to get that same value
back later now I use the constant text
underscore contents so I don't have to
remember exactly what key are used
otherwise I might spell it wrong or get
capitalization wrong when getting the
belly back from the bundle and that data
wouldn't be read back now keep in mind
you can store multiple values in the
same bundle as long as they have
different keys you can get them back in
if you give two values of the same type
the same key then the second value saved
will replace the first one so it's
important to make sure that the strings
we used for the keys are unique now
notice that I've also called the super
method I mentioned that we put our code
after that so we've left that in on line
63 that's because the super method takes
care of storing all the things that
Android looks after such as the contents
of an edit text that the user has
started typing into if we don't call
super only the values we store in the
bundle will be retrieved
now all that won't make more sense when
you've seen the code to get the data
back we're going to do that in the on
restore instance date so I'm going to
come up here to on restore instance date
and after the super call we're going to
type vowel space and save string is
equal to it's going to be saved
instant state question mark gets string
it's going to be text underscore
contents in two double quotes
then we're going to use text view
question mark text equals saved strength
so this time the Valley retrieved our
data from the bundle we're providing the
same key which is stored in the constant
text underscore contents so that the
bundle knows which value we want to
retrieve and if a string value with the
key text contents doesn't appear in the
bundle that getstring function let's
code here on line 49
well that returns the default value
we've specified and that's an empty
string so nothing will be printed and
again that's if it doesn't text contents
doesn't appear in the bundle now that
default value is probably unnecessary
because the bundle should always contain
our data
remember that on restore winston state
will only ever be caught if data was
saved
if unsaved instance date was called
before the activity was destroyed and we
saved the data in unsaved instance date
so it should always be present so once
we've got the value in a saved a string
variable we set the text views text
property on line 52 the string that we
retrieved from the bundle now there's no
need to store the value in save string
first so it's actually more usual to
write it this way so I'm going to come
up those two lines out you don't you
just do something like this so text view
question mark dot text equals save
instance date question mark dot get
string and it'll be text times called
contents and two double quotes as I
mentioned alright and I've left the
original code in there commented out so
you can see it in the source code for
this video if you download it but more
importantly let's now try and see
whether this works I'm going to run this
she won't get our log captor showing as
well
all right so we're going to put it in
their familiar items again so bread milk
cheese we're going to type in cream
again and that's pretty normal I'm not
going to tap the button after I've top
cream so that we can test that we
haven't broken anything but now if we
click on rotate and I'll just click on
back so we can see the yeah we can get
rid of the keyboard we can see that now
we've actually got our three items
showing back on the screen the bread
milk and cheese and looking at the lock
cap you can see that unsaved instance
Tate was called and also on restore
instance date was called now we didn't
save the text say ourselves for what was
in the inner text remember that was
taken care of for us by Android the list
of items in the text view was saved and
restored by the code we added to the
saver restore instance state functions
alright so this point our app now copes
when a device's orientation has changed
now that may look like a lot of work but
if you think about it we really only had
to implement the two functions on
restore instance date and unsaved
instance date and also we didn't have to
write a lot of code in either of those
either the other overridden methods are
really only added so that we could see
them being called as the app went
through its life cycle now you might be
wondering what all those methods are for
really it's unlikely that Google
included them just so we could see them
being called so they must have a use
there's actually all sorts of uses and
it really depends on what your app is
doing the unpause method would be a good
place to save any data that the user
would want to keep permanently as long
as you're saving it locally and can do
so quickly then we've saved the contents
of the text into a bundle but that
wasn't permanently storing it it was
just a way to cope with orientation
changes and the like having created a
shopping list or whatever the user would
probably want to store it somewhere so
they can use that list when they get to
the shops if we close the activity down
without saving that lose at all
you know the unpause method could save
that data and stop on the other hand can
be used to cancel the data transfer over
the inter
it with on start perhaps initiating it
again when the app runs again and it's
also more appropriate to save data
remotely here rather than on pause now
it's hard to know which if any you'll
need until you come to need them but
when you do you'll be able to work out
which method is the most suitable for
what you want to do but looking at each
method in the context of the activity
life cycle alright so that's the end of
our button click counter app the only
thing left for me to do now is really
just come up here to the code menu and
click on reformat code and then we need
to need to do anything as you can see
that everything was correctly formatted
I've done that just to make sure the
code is formatted nicely before I add it
to the resources section for this video
so I'm going to finish the video by
showing you the Google documentation for
activities and the activity lifecycle
now I definitely recommend you read
those pages when you want to know more
about how this all works then the first
one I'm going to show just gonna open a
browser here this first one is the
activity page on the android reference
Docs and the link will be in the
resources section and then also include
service roll down a little bit so
Google's diagram of the life cycle okay
keep in mind that Google also produced
guides in their documentation and the
activities guide is also available and
there's the link to that and I get in
the resources section
that's quite a useful well why a page to
find out more information about
activities and there's also the
tutorials on the Android developer site
so you may find the one on recreating
the activity after the system is
destroyed it useful and they'll give you
the link for that one
that's also got some good information
but lots of good information on that
page as well and currently the code
snippets are only showing in Java but
I'm sure over time they'll update is to
show both Java and Kotlin examples but
the documents are well worth reading all
the same so happy reading
and I'll see you in the next video